[Music]
I was very much struck by how the
translation of the biblical writings
jump started the development of literacy
across the entire world illiteracy was
the norm the pastor's home was the first
school and every morning it would begin
with singing the Christian faith is a
singing religion probably 80 percent of
Scripps memorization today exists only
because of what is sung this is amazing
here we have a Gutenberg Bible printed
on the Press of Johann goonberg science
and religion are opposing forces in the
world but historically that has not been
the case now the book is available to
everyone from Shakespeare to modern
education and medicine and science to to
civilization itself it is the most
influential book in all history and
hopefully people can walk away with at
least a sense of that
if you own territory uh vast swath of
landed you're doing nothing to it and
someone comes and squats on it and
spends a lot of time improving it at
some point they actually develop a valid
legal claim to the property itself and
so it there seems to be something
intrinsic to our notion of valid
ownership that if you're going to occupy
a territory you actually have to do
something with it that's productive and
so that's that's at least part of the
claim you're making at the moment to
buttress the notion that the Jewish
people have a valid claim to the present
territory
there were a lot of movement back and
forth but but the Jews have actually
taken the land and made something of it
well I'm saying something else though
I'm saying that they held the land for
two thousand years were kicked out the
Arabs came and conquered it and
immediately lost it to others and did
nothing with it the others did nothing
with it so it was basically they took
over my apartment okay a long time ago
the the guys who took over who basically
kicked me out were kicked out themselves
the apartment was left Barren and many
decades in this case centuries later I
come back to this mess okay this ruin
and I built it up back and I not only
improve it I not only make my ownership
based on Improvement but then nobody
else did anything with it there was
there was no someone else there
practically were no tenants there that's
my argument
[Music]
thank you
hello everybody watching and listening
um I have
I'm always excited to talk to the guests
that I'm talking to which is why I bring
them on the podcast to begin with but
today
we have something that I think is unique
I'm going to be speaking with Ben Yemen
Netanyahu
who was recently elected as prime
minister of Israel this is a very
interesting development as far as I'm
concerned it's the first time I've had
the opportunity to speak with someone
who is a sitting head of state or soon
will be and I think the reason that
that's relevant and worthy of note is
because
it it it's one of the markers for the
development of a new kind of political
dialogue we're in a situation now where
it's possible to sit with a political
leader and have a genuine conversation
for a long period of time
we'll go at least 90 minutes
unscripted so that
there's no sound bite quality or editing
to it you just get the unvarnished the
the unvarnished
words of someone who's in a position to
make decisions that affect all of us and
so I'm very excited about this I'll read
the bio and then we'll go on to the
interview Benjamin Netanyahu
as I said was recently re-elected as
prime minister of Israel having
previously served in the office from
1996 to 1999 and 2009 to 2021.
from 1967 to 1972 he served as a soldier
and Commander in Sayer at matkal an
elite Special Forces Unit of the Israel
Defense Forces
a graduate of MIT he served as Israel's
ambassador to the U.N from 84 to 88
before being elected to the Israeli
Parliament as a member of the likud
party in 1988
he has published five previous books on
terrorism and Israel's Quest for Peace
and security
he lives in Jerusalem with his wife
Sarah in his newest book Bibi my story
the newly re-elected prime minister
tells the story of his family his people
his path to leadership and his unceasing
commitment to defending his country and
securing its future
hello prime minister Netanyahu thank you
very much for agreeing to talk to me
tonight I've been reading your book your
new book Bibi my story and uh it weaves
an interesting personal tale familial
tale and political cultural tale
altogether and there was one particular
element of it I wanted to begin
discussing with you that's I think of
broad interest
one of the things I realized when I was
reading was just how ignorant I am in
some fundamental sense about the history
of the development of the Jewish state
of Israel and
I know that there's
tremendous constant noise about
issues as fundamental as Israel's right
to exist even and you start by talking
about in in your book you embark on
explaining that at least in some part by
talking about herzl
and his Terror that anti-Semitism that
the rise of anti-Semitism in Europe was
going to cause a catastrophe which was
obviously a Justified Terror would you
be kind enough to walk me and my viewers
and listeners through
your rationale for the moral
justification for Israel or the
political justification as well and I'm
going to do what I can
to my limited ability let's say to push
back I've heard the arguments of
ten young people who are more prone to
give Credence and sympathy to say to the
Palestinian Viewpoint and I'd like to
rectify my ignorance and maybe help my
viewers and listeners do the same thing
so would it be useful to start with
herzl well I'd actually I'd start uh
herzl was what I call our modern Moses
but I'd actually start with the original
Moses the Jewish people uh have lived in
the land of Israel what is now the state
of Israel have lived here and have been
attached to this place for about 3 500
years
three and a half Millennia now for the
first two Millennia roughly of that time
uh we were living in what is described
in a text commonly known is the Bible so
the Bible describes how the Jewish
people lived on this land were attached
to this land fought off conquerors
sometimes were conquered but stayed on
their land and that continued for a very
long time until roughly the sixth
seventh century actually after the birth
of Christ okay for for roughly for two
thousand years uh we were conquered by
the Romans we were conquered by the
byzantines they did a lot of bad things
to us but they didn't really Exile us
contrary to what people think okay the
ones the the loss of our land actually
occurred when the Arab Conquest took
place in the 7th Century the Arabs burst
out from Arabia and they did something
that no other conqueror not the Romans
not the byzantines not the Greeks before
them not Alexander the Great nobody did
before they actually started taking over
the land of the Jewish Farmer they
brought in military colonies that took
over the land and gradually over the
next two centuries the Jews became a
minority in our land so it is under the
Arab Conquest that the Jews lost their
Homeland the Arabs were the Colonials
the Jews were the natives dispossessed
well that happens in history the Jews
were dispossessed we were flung to the
Far Corners of the earth uh suffered
unimagined terrible suffering because we
had no Homeland but we didn't disappear
and we never gave up the dream of coming
back to our ancestral Homeland so
generation after generation Jews could
be in Warsaw they could be in Yemen they
could be in uh they could be in China
and they said next year in Jerusalem
we'll come back next year in Jerusalem
well that was made possible because the
Arabs who had conquered the land best
basically left it Barren they never made
it their own it was a Barren land it
really had practically it was an empty
land and in the 19th century the idea of
coming back next year in Jerusalem
became a reality by the way in part
because of Christian Zionist support for
the idea of the great return the Jews
came back in the 19th century to the
land of Israel the result of this return
was that we started building Farms
factories places of employment Arabs for
nearby countries started immigrating and
they now became they call themselves
Palestinians they reconstructed history
and said we've been here for centuries
no they haven't they weren't there at
all and they didn't have a national
Consciousness we came back made it our
land and we said okay we now will live
together we decided to establish a state
in 1948 that's 75 years ago and we we
said everybody can live here the Arab
said there can't be a Jewish State you
have no right to be here it's our land
it's not your land it's been our land
for 3 500 years if you took over your uh
somebody's apartment knock them out
dispossessed them and they never gave up
the claim and they said it's our claim
and you left this Barren dump okay and
this the the the families the progeny of
the people you you kicked out came back
rebuilt the house
you cannot come back and tell them you
don't belong here we're going to kick
you out especially since your late
companies who've come to live in you
know in part of the house which is what
the so-called Palestinians are okay we
say to them you can live here we can
live here but it's our land it's our
state and the reason this conflict
continues is because the Palestinians
who are represent the the colonial
Powers the Arab Conquest uh of the
Middle East and Beyond they're saying
you have no right for a Jewish State
well we do if any people has any right
to a state if any people never gave up
their dreams of returning to their
ancestral home if any people rebuilt
their home from nothing from Barren
wasted land it's the Jewish people to
tell them you'll have suffered more than
anyone else you have never lost your
dream of coming back and rebuilding your
National Life in your ancestral Homeland
you have no right to be there but the
Arabs who are trying to destroy you they
have that that right that is a complete
perversion of history and also a
complete perversion of Justice the Jews
belong to this land this land belongs to
the Jews the Palestinians are free to
live here next to us among us but
they're not free to demand the
dissolution of the Jewish state that is
not Justice that is Injustice that's the
shortest lecture I can give you about
Jewish history
in today's world we sometimes lose sight
of the judeo-christian beliefs that
built our society this is why it is so
important to study scripture and develop
a dedicated prayer life there's no
better way to do that than with hallow
hallow is the number one Christian
Prayer app in the U.S and the number one
Catholic app in the world it's filled
with studies meditations and Reflections
including the number one Christian
podcast the Bible in a year download
Hollow today and try their Advent pray
25 challenge a 25-day journey through
Bible stories from both the Old and New
Testament leading up to the birth of
Jesus these meditations are led by cast
members from the largest Christian
streaming Series in history The Chosen
Advent pray 25 will help grow your
understanding of mankind and develop a
disciplined prayer habit during a season
when our discipline is put to the test
download Halo for three months
completely free and experience a
personal development that can come from
regular prayer meditation and reflection
on who the Bible calls us to be get
Hollow for free at hallow.com Jordan
it's hallow.com Jordan give yourself the
gift of Peace calm and discipline this
Christmas go to hollow.com slash Jordan
today
so you so why do you think the claim
that the Palestinians were
somehow
there in Israel first and have been
displaced in a colonial occupation let's
say by the Jews why do you think that
idea has gained such cachet
not least in the west because of
ignorance I mean what do you mean they
were here first well you know you're
familiar with the story of Jesus right
Jesus was a Jewish rabbi living in 2000
years ago he was a rabbi from the
Galilee okay he came to Jerusalem he
turned the money tables of the uh the
the the tables of the money changers on
the Temple Mount where did that happen
did it happen in Tibet it happened here
Jerusalem was our capital King David
made it our Capital three thousand years
ago so the Jews are here to try to uh to
say that they weren't here and that the
Palestinians were here thousands of
years ago is ridiculous anybody you know
anybody who can you can actually Google
this and and find out how absurd this
thing is so as far as Reinventing
ancient history that is
that is unpardonable because anybody can
find out and understand that the Jews
were here for thousands of years the
Palestinians weren't here as far as
modern times are concerned what did
Palestinians have said is oh and I I
write this in my book
and I showed because it's so comical
what what they say is we were here uh
Palestine was a verdant land in the 19th
century teaming with the you know with
the Palestinians until the Jews came in
and took it over and threw it out okay
well that's what Arafat effectively said
in his uh Infamous speech in the United
Nations blaming Zionism equating Zionism
with racism well there's only one
problem with that he said that the
Jewish invasion of this verdant
Palestinian Homeland uh happened in 1881
okay the problem with that is that uh 12
years before a famous visitor among
hundreds of visitors named Mark Twain
visited the holy land and he describes a
totally different picture he describes
Palestine I'm quoting him is a vast
Wasteland he said only imagination can
Grace this Barren land with the pomp of
circumstance in life it's just he said
we travel for a whole day we didn't see
in the Galilee we didn't see a human
being one single human being he said
Jerusalem sits in sackcloth and Ashes
and as he was saying that it's the
Jewish return that began the Jewish
return that began building the land well
perhaps one could argue it's obvious
that Mark Twain was not in the service
of the Jewish State because it didn't
exist he wasn't in the service of the
Jewish Lobby because it was an Eddie
Jewish Lobby he was just reporting what
was there could there possibly have been
a tremendous influx of Palestinians
between 1869 and 1881 the year that that
Arafat says the Jewish Invasion began
and destroyed the Palestinian Paradise
well alas no because in the year 1881
another famous visitor visits Israel and
he writes visits this land and he writes
also his Memoirs okay his name was
Arthur penrin Stanley he was a very
famous very famous courtier of uh Queen
Victoria's Court okay and he came here
on a special visit and he says I looked
South and I looked North he says I'm in
Judea and I see nothing he says a Barren
expanse and they both Express both Twain
and Arthur penrith Stanley say the same
thing when when or when will the Jews
come back and bring this land to life
and the answer is right then we came
back brought it back to life there were
Arabs living here but it was as I said a
Barren Wasteland but ours began to
immigrate naturally because we created a
rise in the standard of living that
attracted Arabs from neighboring states
those Arabs are now those the
descendants of those Arabs who migrated
as a result of the Jewish return many of
them now are considered Palestinians so
what I'm saying and I'm saying this to
you uh Jordan and to your audience there
has been a complete fabrication of
History it's the biggest lie of the big
lies that have permeated the 20 20th
century in the 21st century is to say
that the ABS were here before that is
the Palestinians who are here before the
Jews when we were here for thousands of
years that we are the Colonials when in
fact it was the Arabs who were the
Colonials who dispossessed the original
Natives and that is the Jews that we
came back to this land that was laid
Barren by the Arab Conquest brought it
back to life and allowed Arab
immigration what we call now Palestinian
immigration to come back in and now they
say to us in unimaginable hutzpah you
know they say you don't belong here they
recreate ancient history they recreate
modern history and this is a lot of how
come it's ridiculous it's absurd so some
of it also seems to be I would say
technically speaking something like a
time frame problem
right I mean you said the Arabs came in
in the 7th century and that's a long
time ago and so from the 7th Century to
now you might think about
you might think of that as being a time
frame long enough to allow for a valid
claim of sovereignty ownership but the
Jews rejoinder is well we have a much
older claim than that one that spans 3
500 years and the problem I have with
that conceptually and then I'll get to
some other issues that are relevant to
this is that it's not exactly obvious
what time frame of analysis should
should be primary you have a very and I
don't really know how to solve that I do
I do and I'll answer your question it's
a valid question
if the Arabs having conquered the land
in the 7th century and dispossessed the
Jews over the next two centuries the
Jewish Farmers kicked them out and so on
if they established a viable State a
viable national identity there and so on
you're right you know these things
happen in history you're supplanted by
another people fine but that's not what
happened the Arab conquerors themselves
were replaced by other first of all they
did nothing with the land and just
Barren they actually built one town one
town it's called ramley that's it you
know hundreds and hundreds of Jewish
biblical sites and hundreds and
thousands of uh hundreds of news sites
that we built the Arabs built one place
one town called Romney that's it so they
did nothing with the land then they were
replaced by other conquerors other
conquerors came in the mom hooks the
Ottomans ultimately the British a series
of conquerors in other words they they
took over the land lost the land and did
nothing with the land so if they had
done what you say if they had created if
that house that we were expelled from
was taken over by another and other
people another family they built a
family there they had children
grandchildren they extended the porch
they they built a parking garage and so
it's gone what can you do you still have
the ability to demand uh reclamations uh
compensation and so on but you know
tough luck that happens in history but
that's not what happened
once the Jews were conquered by the
Arabs the Arabs did nothing with it lost
the land to others now we come back and
bring it back to life 13 centuries later
and performed this miracle and they
fabricate a history where we were there
all the time it was a verdant Homeland
it was built up it was nothing of the
kind it was Desert it was nothing now
it's not merely Mark Twain and Arthur
penrin Stanley who say that hundreds and
hundreds and hundreds of travelogues
over the centuries of of uh famous uh
French Poets of the Swiss Travelers of
German uh theologians everybody poets
writers uh Travelers who describe
exactly the same thing there was nothing
there there was no Palestinian State
there were no Palestinians they didn't
even the Arabs even didn't call
themselves that they were calling
themselves parts of Southern Syria or
whatever there was no National
Consciousness there was nothing to form
the Consciousness about in the 20th
century tree the Arab world and the
Palestinians and their supporters in the
west among the intellectual Elites
basically erased history and we created
a fake history a fake history that
deracinates the Jewish roots that are
unparalleled there is no other story in
the history of Nations where people
fought for so long for their land for
thousands of two thousand years were
dispossessed woman came back to it did
not kick out an existing population with
a national Consciousness rebuilt the
land and now are being told you have no
connections to it you were you know
you're you're the Colonials no we're not
we're not we're not just to just to just
to give this yeah just to give us a fine
point because this is so crucial what
we're discussing and I discuss it in at
considerable length in my book because
people are so ignorant of History we are
not the belgians in the Congo
we're not the Dutch in Indonesia okay
we're not the the British in South
Africa
we had been there all the time we had
been in the Congo we had been if you
will the equivalent in Indonesia we were
kicked out of the Congo and nothing
happened in the Congo nothing no other
people there no development nothing okay
now we come come back to our land Build
It Up enable immigration from of Arabs
or Now call Palestinians from
neighboring lands and they tell us oh
you don't belong here you dispossessed
us this is essentially what our
propaganda and Palestinian propaganda
has done and what I labored not only in
the present book my own history maybe my
story but in a previous book a place
among the Nations to debunk and you know
what the interesting thing is this you
know so far it's quite quite amazing no
fact that I put forward
in any of these books has ever been
challenged not not one not one usually
you know when people uh you know Place
among the Nations my previous book
answering much of the questions that you
ask uh
usually polemical books are challenged
you know the critics and in my case
critics from the left they'd find a you
know some stragglers some
factoid that is wrong some formulation
that is unfortunate and so on okay
nothing
nobody ever challenged it it got in
those days rave reviews from The New
York Times from great writers like
Connor Cruz O'Brien and Paul Johnson and
others uh these are great writers and
and it wasn't challenged okay my current
book has not been challenged on the
historical facts nothing people can
argue about my opinions but they don't
argue about my facts I'm very try to be
very rigorous about the facts this whole
uh attack on the the Jewish people's
right to live in their in the Jewish
homeland the attempt to erase the Bible
and to erase the history after the Bible
and to create recreate create create a
modern fantasy that doesn't exist based
on the Palestinians who want to destroy
us who support terrorism who are
anti-democratic or anti uh or basically
neocolonials because that they're the
really the Colonials that is uh that is
something that I think has uh uh it's
not really Folly it has something
fundamentally wrong morally because it
is both untrue and unjust
Shopify is the all-in-one Commerce
platform trusted by millions of
entrepreneurs to create their online
store and so much more Shopify makes it
simple to sell to anyone from anywhere
whether you're selling succulents or
stilettos start selling with Shopify and
join the platform simplifying Commerce
for millions of businesses worldwide
with Shopify you'll customize your
online store to your brand discover new
customers and build the relationships
that will keep them coming back Shopify
covers all the sales channels to
successfully grow your business from an
in-person POS system to an all-in-one
e-commerce platform even across social
media platforms like Tick Tock Facebook
and Instagram thanks to 24 7 support and
free on-demand business courses Shopify
is here to help you succeed every step
of the way it's how every minute new
sellers around the world make their
first sale with Shopify and you can too
sign up for a free trial at shopify.com
jbp go to shopify.com jbp to start
selling online today that's shopify.com
jbp
okay so your the claim so far if
if I'm going to say lean in the
direction of your argument
without leaning too far and too
obviously I would say is something like
this and tell me if I've I've got it
right
um there's a host of competing claims to
the territory that now constitutes
Israel and
you could have some debate about perhaps
technically about which of those claims
should reign supreme the additional case
that you make however is that the the
Israelis
the Jews have done a tremendous amount
of work in improving this territory and
I know there's a principle of ownership
in Western common law and English common
law and I'm not a lawyer so I may muck
this up to some degree but I understand
the principle if you own territory uh
vast swath of landed you're doing
nothing to it and someone comes and
squats on it and spends a lot of time
improving it at some point they actually
develop a valid legal claim to the
property itself and so it there seems to
be something intrinsic to our notion of
valid ownership that if you're going to
occupy a territory you actually have to
do something with it that's productive
and so that's that's at least part of
the claim you're making at the moment to
buttress the notion that the Jewish
people have a valid claim to the present
territory well and there were a lot of
movement back and forth yes but but the
Jews have actually taken the land and
made something of it well I'm saying
something else though I'm saying that
they held the land for two thousand
years were kicked out the Arabs came and
conquered it and immediately lost it to
others and did nothing with it the
others did nothing with it so it was
basically they took over my apartment
okay a long time ago the the guys who
took over who basically kicked me out
were kicked out themselves the apartment
was left Barren and many decades in this
case centuries later I come back to this
mess okay this ruin and I built it up
back and I not only improve it I not
only make my ownership based on
Improvement but that nobody else did
anything with it there was there was no
someone else there practically were no
tenants right that's my argument ready
you're well and you're also making
you're also making the case that when
the Jews came to Israel
they were doing what they could to
coexist with the people who were there
the sparse number of people who were
there but also to set up a state that
would invite other people who weren't
Jewish to live there as well so it
wasn't an oppressive regime in any no
well we know what happened we know what
happened we we know that when when uh 75
years ago when the state of Israel was
declared uh you didn't have a single
Arab Refugee I mean the Arabs say now
that they're enmity to Israel and the
reason they went to war with Israel was
because of the Arab Refugee but there
wasn't a single Arab refugees or
Palestinian refugee when Israel was
established in fact the refugees are the
result of Arab aggression and not its
cause and in fact the the Arab Onslaught
five Arab armies that attacked the uh
the uh the tiny Jewish state in its
Inception uh the tiny these five Arab
armies created two Refugee problems one
the Palestinian refugees who fled before
the advancing armies being promised that
they could come back in a few days
because the Jews would be annihilated
driven to the sea that didn't work out
thank God but in those five Arab states
there lived many Jews those Jews were
summarily kicked out after our war of
independence so the araban slaughter on
Israel and Israel's Inception produced
two Refugee problems one Palestinian
refugees Arab refugees we call them
Palestinians and the second is Jewish
refugees now Israel with less than one
percent of the total land mass of the
Arab states takes in the same number of
refugees Jewish refugees as you had
Palestinian refugees you don't see them
here they're integrated into our society
into our government to do business into
everything we solved without the
corticopia of Arab oil we solved our
Refugee problem caused by the araban
slaughter in Israel the Palestinian
refugee problems kept Alive by the Arabs
that have a hundred times more land
infinite oil resources they keep it
alive as a battering ram to produce
exactly the propaganda you say so
basically what the technique of our
propaganda has been and I describe it to
some extent in my present in my
biography too because you have to
understand it you have to see it to
believe it is to turn the results of
Arab aggression against Israel into its
cause they first did that with the
refugees when Israel was established
they then didn't they didn't accept
Israel's right to exist even though
we're a tiny country they tried to
attack us again 19 years later and
destroy us that's called The Six Day
Wars in six days we pushed back the Arab
countries and took over our ancestral
lands of Judea Samaria
and again what the exit is exactly the
same thing they said that our occupation
our so-called occupation of the
heartland of the Jewish people Judean
Samara that produced the the war no that
didn't produce the war it was the result
of their attempt their second attempt to
annihilate us so this technique of
reversing causality that is accusing
Israel basically turning the results of
Arab aggression into its cause is again
one one of these ways of creating the
delegitimization of Israel the reason we
have not had peace with the Palestinians
is not because of the Arab refugees
there weren't any when they attacked us
the reason is not the territories we
didn't control Arab these territories
they were in Arab hands before The Six
Day War all of these things are a result
of the Arab aggression and what is the
cause of the Arab aggression it's the
persistent Arab refusal to accept a
Jewish state in any boundary in our
ancestral Homeland and if you move that
you get peace now how do we know that we
get peace
because this persistent Arab refusal has
dissipated
it's dissipated over time as the
strength of Israel as I described in my
book as Israel becomes not merely a fact
but a fact a permanent fact at the
Middle East so they know they can't get
rid of it so Arab countries begin to
make peace with us and I had the
privilege which I described again in in
my book of forging four Arab peace
agreements four peace agreements with
Arab states because
that barrier that Obstacle of refusing
to accept a Jewish State and any
boundary has disappeared where does it
persist in the Palestinians or one to
two percent of the entire world wagging
the you know it's the tail wagging the
dog or they tried until recently they
were quite successful in wagging the dog
they Palestinians cling on to the
fantasy of eliminating Israel denying us
our historical and present rights to
live anywhere in this land refusing to
any kind of practical compromise
refusing to accept the the Declaration
of Israel in the U.N the partition
resolution we did they refused refusing
any kind of realistic negotiation for
peace what has happened and what here's
what happened Jordan
for the last quarter of a century
after the initial peace treaties with
Egypt and Jordan for 25 years we had no
peace treaties with any Arab country
because the elites uh the foreign policy
Elites and the experts and the
intellectuals explained you cannot make
peace with the rest of the Arab world
unless you make peace first with the
Palestinians there's a problem there
right right well you can't because the
Palestinians are not interested in peace
with Israel they're interested in the
peace without Israel they're not
interested in a state next to Israel
they're interested in a state instead of
Israel so if you wait for the
Palestinians you'll wait another quarter
of a century another half century
another Century you're not going to get
anywhere I had to break that log Gem and
describe how I did that in my book I had
to get go around the Palestinians go to
the uh to uh the United Arab Emirates go
Bahrain Morocco Sudan and make peace
with them why did they change their
attitude towards Israel
they changed it because of the result
the growth of Israeli power as Israel
became more powerful technologically we
made a free market Revolution that
released the genius in Our People Israel
became the Innovation Nation you can't
do that if you're paying 75 marginal tax
rate right so we got tax rates put in
basically a capitalist economy and
Israel exploded but it also became very
powerful militarily because we could now
afford to fund I think the the
combination of economic power through
free markets and Military and
intelligence power that combined to give
us diplomatic power and with that Arab
leaders in the area began to see it not
see Israel not as their enemy but as
their indispensable Ally against the
force that was threatening both Israel
and them and that's Iran Iran's
aggression and secondly they saw the
Innovation nation that is Israel is a
font of tremendous technology that could
better the lives of their people
and therefore we start we made these
historic peace agreements in record time
because now we were no longer bound by
the Palestinian straitjacket that you're
familiar with in Toronto and New Zealand
and so on the Arab world is not there
some of it is but a lot of it is
changing and we are so my my idea is how
do you solve the Palestinian problem
anytime they want to truly sit down and
negotiate
be my guest I'll be happy to do that and
I've tried that in the past but in
reality I'm taking I took a different
track instead of saying first we'll
solve the problem with the Palestinians
then we'll solve the problem with the
Arab world I actually reversed it I said
let's go to the Arab world
and let's get peace with the Arab world
and then Circle back to the Palestinians
if they're ready to come before fine but
if not let's get peace with 99 and then
try to make peace with the one percent
as opposed to let's try the implacable
one percent and wait until we get to the
other uh 99 that's a complete reversal
of concept it's still being challenged
you'll see some of the old guards still
say no no we have to uh you know we have
to go to the Palestinians before we go
to the Arab world and we'll never get
peace
do you have a coffee lover on your
holiday shopping list Black Rifle has
all the best Brewing gear thermoses mugs
and apparel designed for folks who love
country and coffee Black Rifle sources
the most exotic roasts from around the
globe all coffee is roasted here in the
U.S by veteran-led teams of coffee
experts stuff your Christmas stockings
with the latest roast from America's
coffee for 10 off with the code Jordan
better yet sign your Secret Santa up for
a coffee Club subscription imagine the
joy of a pre-scheduled coffee delivery
your favorite roast when you need the
most it's the gift that keeps on giving
Black Rifle coffee company is veteran
founded and operated they take pride in
serving coffee and culture to people who
love America every purchase you make
with Black Rifle helps support veteran
and first responder causes go to
blackriflecoffee.com and use promo code
Jordan for 10 off coffee Coffee Gear
apparel or when you sign up for a new
coffee Club subscription that's black
riflecoffee.com with promo code Jordan
for 10 off Black Rifle coffee supporting
veteran and America's coffee
so I want to I want to divide this into
two tracks now I wanna I wanna first of
all investigate
uh some of the
history behind
the willingness of other states to
support the Jewish claim to a Homeland
in the Middle East because I think
that's quite interesting and then I want
to speak more about the Abraham Accords
which you discussed so one of the things
that fascinated me well historically but
also in your book is your discussion of
the of the bowl for declaration
and so that's obviously before the utter
catastrophe of the Holocaust and the
catastrophes the Jewish people ran into
in the mid middle of the 20th century by
already by the time of the Balfour
Declaration there was some sense at
least in Great Britain that the the
claim that herzl had put forward for
example that the Jews and the world
would benefit from a Jewish homeland in
the Middle East had some validity so why
why do you think that developed and and
then how do you think it extended
because you got bipartisan support for
the notion of a Jewish homeland from the
Americans by 1944 and then of course
there was the U.N 1947 declaration so
it's not as if the Jews imposed this
Vision on the Middle East by themselves
there was support all over the world and
so I'm I'm could you walk us through how
that how that support developed why you
think it developed yeah it developed
because uh because in the uh certainly
in the 19th century in the early 20th
century
there was a the propaganda that I've
described rewriting the history had not
taken root and most educated people knew
the history of the Bible the history of
the Jewish people their dispossession
what they thought were the horrors and
the Jews suffered in their Exile and
dispersion which was nothing compared to
what was uh going to come later in the
Holocaust but that was enough for them
and they they basically knew that the
land was practically empty and that I
mean there were people there but it was
practically empty and it made sense that
both for uh from a Biblical
prognostication for those who had a
religious orientation and also a
humanist view that this evil of History
this Injustice of History would be
corrected that this long-suffering
people the Jews who contributed so much
to to civilization
and and to history and to morality the
idea of morality it's the Ten
Commandments you know that became the
code the moral code of the world and so
many other things the the birth of
Christianity many of the ideas the moral
ideas that we have originated on these
Hills where I'm sitting in right now
this tiny you know Dusty edge of Asia
where this tribe strange tribe lived
here and talked about you know man's the
fact that people should not remain
slaves that there should be a law that
applies to all of them that kings are
not Divine that is subject to moral
Authority and censure and all sorts of
other crazy ideas like that it's all
originated here and so the educated
leaders that met in World War one after
uh the collapse of the Ottoman Empire
they had to decide you know who gets
what and they came upon the idea of
self-determination that is that people
should have you know the the ability to
govern their Nations obviously with
Civic rights for other people's living
in their midst and they concluded
knowing the history that I just
described that is so unknown today on
college campuses in a among so-called
intellectuals or anything but that uh
that uh that the Jews deserved this
right to rebuild their National Life and
their ancestral Homeland uh and uh
uh and that's how it developed but the
first one to actually Bring It Forward
you mentioned in the beginning of your
comments was Theodore herzl Theodore
hertzel uh
was a giant of History he he was a
journalist he was a Jewish journalist
and uh the late 19th century he was born
in uh in Hungary but uh worked for a
very prestigious paper in Vienna uh when
he was dispatched to Paris as a
correspondent he saw the the infamous
Dreyfus trial where a Jewish officer in
the French army was falsely accused as
it later turned out of the Espionage and
betrayal and was sentenced to Devil's
Island and other horrible things and he
said this if this can happen if this can
happen to the Jews
in the Apex of Western Civilization
then it could happen anywhere and he
predicted that within a few decades the
fires of anti-Semitism would consume the
Jews of Europe that they would be
slaughtered he actually saw that he
wrote these things in 1900 roughly and
before and of course the Holocaust came
less than half a century later and he
said there's only one solution for this
the solution is to have the Jews the
solution is not going to be to integrate
the Jews and uh in societies uh because
that's not going to work the the
solution would not be to eliminate
nationalism uh through communism and
other Cosmopolitan uh internationalism
right that's not going to work either
and in fact he was right because so much
of anti-Semitism came from stalinism and
so on okay it's not merely Nazism it's
stalinism too so either thing it's not
going to work
he said there's only one solution the
Jews should have a nation of their own
that is a country of their own and he
sought to persuade first the German
Kaiser and after that the uh
Ottomans uh Sultan in Istanbul to give
the Jews a state of their own and he
didn't succeed he died after eight years
that's it eight years but in these eight
years he launched this movement that
turned the dream of Ages you know
Century after Century next year in
Jerusalem he turned it from a prayer
from a dream into a practical plan
my grandfather Nathan Nathan milikovsky
Netanyahu he was enthralled by herzl he
became a tremendous speaker at the age
of 20. thousands of people crowded to
hear him throughout Europe history of
Poland there were records press records
of check if how people fought each other
they broke Windows they fought
physically to hear this young man speak
about the Jewish about herzl's Vision
coming back to the to the Jewish
homeland well herzl died he died too
early and his followers continued the
dream even though he was dead my father
my grandfather was one of them my father
was one of them but they didn't succeed
so now we fast forward in 1917 they
succeed partly because uh because the
British Empire which now after the
defeat of the Ottomans controlled what
is now the land of Israel decided to
give the Jews a Homeland they didn't say
it state yet but they said a Homeland it
was clear it was a corridor to a state
this was met by fervent Arab opposition
by many of the Arabs who had immigrated
to Israel uh to the what is now the land
of Israel they said now stop can't come
anymore okay they decided we're just
going to oppose any Jewish law
and the British back down they backed
down from the so-called promise they
gave it's called the Balfour Declaration
where they promised the Jewish online
they backed off okay
uh and now uh the Jews are stuck they're
in Europe they can't migrate because
Jewish immigration was effectively
blocked by the British who uh betrayed
their Promises to the Jewish people
uh and um
and now hitlerism Rises
1933 it arises to power my father
who later became a great historian of
the Jewish people he's all of 23 years
old and here's what he writes with the
rise of Hitler he says hitlerism will
annihilate
all the Jews of Europe
and it's racial anti-Semitism that would
consume every last Jew
and the only way we can fight it is to
persuade the Civilized world
that it is not only the Jews who will be
annihilated or threatened it's their
civilization too this young bencio
Netanyahu 33 year 23 years old writes in
1933 if more people had heeded what he
wrote
then perhaps we would avoid it a
tremendous catastrophe that occurred to
my people but also to the 60 million who
lost their lives in World War II well
they didn't
now my father saw this coming
and a few years later
he went to the United States in World
War II and he sought to recruit American
public opinions a young man in his early
30s he's trying to recruit American
public opinion to recognize that it's
not merely our for for the sake of
Justice doing Justice with the Jews who
are being incinerated in Europe it's for
American interest
and Western interest to have a strong
Jewish state
a strong Jewish state
and finally you know he makes his way up
up the ladder because one official hears
him brings him to another because he
argued something that no Jew had argued
before no Zionist leader argued before
they all argued the moral case which
we've been discussing at some length in
this problem but my father he didn't he
didn't abandon the moral case he argued
it with great passion but he turned when
he when he talked to Statesmen as he
taught me when you talk to public
opinion you talk about Justice
and you have to argue the justice of
your cause
that those who are unjust do the same so
you may as well do it to protect
yourself against the the people who lie
the people who cheat or present
themselves as more or less while they
blow up babies deliberately okay
speak of Human Rights while they're
trample human rights you have to argue
Justice and speak the truth but when you
speak to Statesmen as my father told me
you have to
tell them you just have to speak of
interest that is what my father did and
at the end of World War II well that
seems to be what you did with the
Abraham accordion exactly right also by
allowing or by facilitating Israel's
development into an economic Powerhouse
exactly you also made the country you
helped build the country into something
that could be practically allied with as
well as let's say making them
simultaneously well exactly and that
that's really you hit exactly on on the
vision because my
purpose in life inherited from my
grandfather and from my father and my
Fallen brother my brother who fell while
leading the uh the most celebrated
Rescue Mission in modern times the
historic Rescue of entebbe where he died
I described that moment when I learned
about it in some detail and also what
happened there which is not fully known
uh but I inherited from them a life of
purpose and the purpose was to assure
the prosperity security and permanence
of the Jewish State insofar as you can
offer anything permanent in our world
and to do that I realized that Israel
had to be not only to fend off the false
claims that try to deny its uh its
legitimacy as a state and our historic
rights and our ancient Homeland but
quite separate or complement
complementing that is to make Israel
very powerful because history is very
unkind and productive and productive not
just powerful right because the the
other the other Advantage you had with
the Abraham Accords was that you could
present Israel as a compelling partner
in Economic Development to Arab states
that were actually hungry for a pathway
forward out of their uni-dimensional
dependence on oil wealth exactly right
when I say powerful I don't mean
militarily powerful and that's exactly
what I I point out in the book and I
said no normally if you ask Israelis
before that what is powerful well
powerful means having a strong Army I
concluded very early on having served in
the Army I served in a special unit
an elite unit and I described my brushes
with death and clandestine missions and
far into an enemy Beyond the Lines of
Enemy Lines and many firefights that I
was in and one I nearly drowned in the
sewage canal and one I was shot while
rescuing uh or taking a part in a rescue
of ostriches and a hijacked plane and so
on so I I had intimacy with the military
obviously because I was also I also
served for five years in the special
unit as a soldier and officer and it's
quite a big adventure story as you you
must have read but uh but I I understood
early on
that to have military power
you have to pay for all these things you
have to pay for F-35 aircraft you have
to pay for submarines for tanks for
drones for cyber for intelligence it's
all very expensive how are you going to
pay for it oh well in Israel
semi-socialist Israel that I grew up in
it's very obvious you tax the rich well
the problem with that is you don't have
enough rich people and they're all going
to leave to other places with lower
taxes so I figure that the way you can
actually enable Israel to be strong
militarily is you have to make it strong
economically but to make it strong
economically you have to completely
overhaul Israel's economic system from
semi socialism to free market capitalism
and I entered public life essentially
with that view and I became first prime
minister then Finance Minister and again
prime minister and I I uh led a free
market Revolution that turned Israel
from basically a supplicant to one of
the most advanced economies on Earth uh
just to give you an example when I
became when I was uh when I was a first
elected prime minister Israel was well
behind all the Western European
economies and certainly the United
States and Canada in terms of per capita
income well as a result of the changes
that I put forward and I described in
the book Israel became in per capita
income uh wealthier than Japan
France Britain
Germany it's actually outstripped them
all and the power my vision was that the
fusion of free markets uh and technology
which we invest in all the time in our
military that produces this tremendous
efflorescence economic and fluorescence
and that gives you the power combination
the power combination is not merely the
military which you can now afford
it's the civilian technology which you
now develop and so Arab states could see
well Israel is a strong country and with
enough Resolute leadership it will
oppose Iran that threatens both of us
but Israel also produces uh fantastic
desalinization Israel produces
tremendous developments in energy
tremendous digital developments
tremendous developments in health and so
on we were the first to leave covert
because of our databases that we
developed for the population and so on
uh we were the first to exit covert and
rebuild our economy very quickly so the
combination of Civilian technology and
Military and intelligence capability
produced this desire on the part of the
Arabs to make peace with us and you know
the attitudes
those ingrained attitudes anti-israeli
attitudes that are still Rife in the
Arab world begin to change because
here's what happened
because I could make these peace
treaties with the Gulf States
hundreds of thousands of Israelis now
fly over the Skies of Saudi Arabia land
in Dubai or Abu Dhabi or Bahrain and
Arabs there
embrace the Israelis who are coming
there and Arabs and Jews are dancing in
the streets now they're making joint
ventures together you know they have uh
economic interests but also the views
the the the
cartoonish
absurdities of Arab propaganda are
dissipated with this human contact so
the new kind of peace that we have a
piece based on on Power and interest is
actually changing the previous
assumptions about Israel in many parts
of the Arab world my goal uh and I say
this openly my goal uh if as I hope I'll
form a government very soon is to
continue
the expansion of the circle of peace to
the rest of the Arab world but I don't
think it's it's going to be actually a
Quantum Leap again a Quantum Leap again
because there is a country there that is
a close neighbor uh that is
extraordinarily important and that's
Saudi Arabia and if I can if I can
achieve a Saudi Israeli Peace we will be
well on the root of ending the Arab
Israeli conflict and we'll be left with
the palestinian-israeli conflict but it
will be a lot more manageable and we
will have changed history the idea is
peace through strength it's an old idea
I didn't invent it but the strength that
I'm talking about is the combination of
economic military and diplomatic
strength I call it the the three pillars
of peace
we'll be right back with prime minister
elect Benjamin Netanyahu first we wanted
to give you a sneak peek at Jordan's new
series Exodus
so the Hebrews created history as we
know it
you don't get away with anything and so
you might think you can bend the fabric
of reality and that you can treat people
instrumentally and that you can bow to
the Tyrant and violate your conscience
without cost you will pay the piper it's
going to call you out of that slavery
into Freedom even if that pulls you into
the desert
and we're going to see that there's
something else going on here that is far
more Cosmic and deeper than what you can
imagine the highest
oh
Spirit to which we're beholden is
presented precisely as that spirit that
allies itself with the cause of Freedom
against tyranny I want villains to get
punished but do you want the villains to
learn before they have to pay the
ultimate price that's such a Christian
question
could you walk us through what you did
on the economic front I have two
questions there what did you do on the
economic front to move Israel from uh
relatively far left leading socialist
state to a free market economy so that's
I'd like to know the details and second
why do you think that given the radical
success of your free market Maneuvers
that the more socialist Vision was so
attractive to Israelis for such a long
period of time
so let's start with the first one said
tell us what you did on the economic
front to to allow for the emergence of
this Silicon Valley like miracle in
Israel that's unfolded over the last
what about 15 years something like that
20 years yes exactly 20 years 20 years
what did I well the first thing I did
was if I could borrow a phrase from the
clintonites never let a good crisis go
to waste we had a tremendous economic
crisis in uh when I took over uh as
Finance Minister in 2003 uh horrible
things and uh the country was still a
long semi-socialist lines
and I decided and most people thought it
was because of the collapse of the.com
Marcus if you remember that which it was
but it was a tiny factor of it it wasn't
a really important one uh or they
thought it was because we had terrorist
uh attacks which was also part of it but
I thought it was a structural problem
why were we before the.com collapse
before this or that explosion of
terrorism why were we a gifted people a
people with a pretty good educational
system how come we were trailing uh all
the countries of Western Europe and the
idea was well education is enough if we
have good education we'll get well
that's hogwash I mean the Soviet Union
had tremendous education and they had
tremendous mathematicians tremendous
physicists tremendous metallurgists they
were dirt poor and yet when any one of
these people was put on a plane and
someone would manage to smuggle himself
to uh Palo Alto they were producing
wealth within days because you had a
free market there so technology by
itself doesn't produce wealth free
markets and Technology free markets do
produce wealth but free markets with
technology produce unbelievable
unbelievable spirits of growth and
wealth and that was my vision for Israel
I had this crisis now and I said in a
crisis I could do
impoundable things I could do things
which were never accepted so what I did
was
you know I spent uh
first of all I was told by I was told by
my advisors having bid prime minister
before and now being a prime minister in
Sharon's government they said who's in
his 70s they said look if you want to be
prime minister again whatever you do
don't take on the finance ministry
because you'll have to cut budgets
you'll have to do horrible things and
you'll never be prime minister again and
I said well what do I want to be prime
minister for
it's to put off push back the Iranian
threat including their quest for nuclear
weapons and to liberate the Israeli
Marketplace so the Israeli economy so if
I achieve at least one of those goals
that's pretty good thing
they said okay but remember you'll never
be prime minister again this is 20 years
ago okay I became Prime Finance Minister
used the crisis after three weeks of
working 20-hour days
I put forward my vision to Israel which
answers your question
I said uh I fell back on a vision
because people were living exactly as
you say in semi-socialist Israel they
were
Awash with false economics basically
saying it divide the pie divide the pie
don't increase the pie okay that was
basically what they all grew up with and
and unless you get mugged by reality
it's very hard to change it but we were
being mugged by real economic reality
again and again and again and we didn't
change now comes my opportunity three
weeks into by being taking up the
finance ministry I give a press
conference
and I felt fell back on my first day in
the military in basic training it's a
long line uh the company's put in a long
line on a big square and the commander
points to me and he says you Netanyahu
look to your right put the man on your
right on your shoulder I did he then
looks at the the next guy puts the guy
on his right on his shoulder and so on
well I had a pretty big guy on my
shoulders because the commander Blows
the Whistle barely took a few steps
together this is a race it's called The
Elephant race the guy at the bottom is
the elephant the guy at the top rides
the elephant the next guy was the
smallest guy in the in the in the
platoon in the company and he had the
biggest guy in his shoulder he collapsed
on the spot the third guy was a big guy
and he had a relatively small guy and he
shot off like a rocket and took the race
and I said to the Israeli public
all national economies are pairs of a
private sector of a public sector
sitting on the shoulders of a private
sector the private sector is the one
that produces the wealth or most of it
okay the added value in the economy and
in our case the public sector became too
big and we were about to collapse we
were about to collapse like the guy next
to me so here's what we're going to do
we're going to put the fat man this
became known as the fat man Thin Man uh
example and taxicab drivers and Comics
spoke about it it actually went into the
Israeli cycle if you ask people now in
Israel fat man Tin Man they know what
I'm talking about the fat man at the top
okay we're gonna put on a strict diet
very hard to do politically you'll get
to cut government budgets okay
and the Thin Man at the bottom we're
going to put a lot of lungs a lot of
oxygen in his lungs and what is oxygen
well many things but number one number
two and number three is low taxes low
taxes low taxes because that's why
people risk you know that's why they
work that's why because they don't want
to pay to the fat man at the top they
want to have it themselves and once we
have that we have to the guy can race
forward right run forward and take the
race compared to other economies well
not true because as he begins to run he
hits a ditch and then he hits a wall and
then he hits a fence and these are
called barriers to competition we have
to deregulate the excessive regulation
that semi-socialist Israel had and still
has to some extent but we've we've done
a lot there so it's three things
compress the fat man
uh lower taxes and do other things to
make business very attractive and easy
and remove barriers to competition and
frankly that's what I did I described I
don't describe the 80 or so major
reforms that we did but I did them in a
crisis and the reason I could get away
with it in a crisis is because you know
things are so bad they were so bad that
they let you do it but I paid heavily
and I almost disappeared from politics
when I when I later ran for uh you know
as a leader of likud my party compressed
to 10 of the knesser that's it right now
we're the biggest party but I I was
merely destroyed so my advisors who told
me don't take the finance ministry why
aren't that wrong I was declared dead
having survived several uh brushes with
death as a as a Commando Soldier I now
uh survived the brush with death
politically so I was eulogized people
said Netanyahu great did great things in
the economy but he's dead
he's good he's down to 12 seats out of
120 in our Parliament it's finished
thank you for what you did go away okay
I recovered from that and I was
re-elected why did you pay why did you
pay the price like what
oh why what was it about your reforms
that that made that price inevitable
because part first of all the most
important part is that uh in order to
put the fat man the public sector on a
diet uh I had to uh I had to cut back
Israel's lavish welfare system which
encouraged people to live on the Dole
and not to go out and work okay so when
I cut uh child allowances which in
Israel were extraordinary they'd go up
with each successive child so you know
by the time you got to the sixth child
uh you know and you had like the
Bedouins in the negative they had 60
children from multiple wives they could
drive the BMW Jeep as their second car
in the Sands of the negative I mean and
this was leading to demographic and
economic uh collapse okay and the same
thing was happening in other sectors uh
ultra-orthodox community and so on they
didn't work they just had a lot of
children which the others you know the
public the private sector had to pay for
and when you cut that well Jordan you I
can tell you you don't become very
popular okay it's not cutting government
well there's a lot of short-term pain
there eh that's there's short-term
immediate pain that's concrete for a lot
of people when you cut and if the
benefits only kick in in the medium to
long term then you have a well then you
have obviously a problem of emotion well
I'd I'd like to do up front in the
benefits later you're absolutely right
and and uh and you have to be prepared
for that that's what leaders do if you
want to lead you have to have a purpose
and your purpose has to be Beyond
yourself and you have to be ready to
shed political blood your own you have
to be ready otherwise you can't lead
otherwise it's meaningless you're always
looking at the polls you always look do
you have a vision of what to do I had a
Clear Vision and I wanted to make Israel
a power among the Nations and the the
things and I paid for it and I nearly
died politically in fact I was eulogized
twice because you got to realize that uh
I checked you know somebody showed me
the statistics the other day so I'm the
longest serving prime minister of uh of
Israel 15 years and in a year if I as I
anticipated will form a government in a
few days in a year's time I will be the
longest serving leader of a democratic
country in the last half century but I'm
already
beating the odds in a different way
because a lot of people came back once
from political death that's happened
um Winston Churchill as an example
of Israel the lady was another example
and you can find them in other places
not that often but you can find them but
the last time somebody came back twice
to do a comeback twice uh was 75 years
ago three quarters of a century ago and
the reason that's happened is because
you're quite right if you're able to
survive political death
then people appreciate
what it is you did for the country and
for them uh even though you know you
could be swept by tremendous hostile
presses in the case in Israel but you
can overcome that uh and in Israel's
case in my case in the story of my life
as I describe it it was to uh
bring into effect this vision of Israel
of a powerful state that uh has this
tremendously creative economy along with
a powerful military uh opening its uh
opening the door to peace with its
neighbors and also fighting what is a
global threat uh Iran with nuclear
weapons and interballistics
intercontinental ballistic missiles that
can reach Canada and the United States
and anywhere is a threat to all of
humanity
and by protecting Israel by fending them
off I of course protect Israel but I
think we protect the larger
International Community people
appreciate that that's why I'm sitting
with you a few days before I expect to
go back into office because we can have
this free-ranging conversation now I can
talk about my book which I unabashedly
am trying to plug in this conversation
and I urge you to read it for two
reasons one as you say to understand the
uh better the history of the Jewish
State the national the Jewish national
movement Zionism that led it the reality
of the Middle East and how it's changing
by the way for the better the threat of
Iran all of these things and my contacts
with the successive American presidents
who are very different from one another
and I've had to deal with quite a few of
them and they're it's an interesting
story but I think beyond that I think
it's to live a life of purpose
okay well you had to be guided by and
have faith in principles that were
outside of short-term advantage in order
to do what you did and and that's the
story that you lay out in your book and
that seems to be in accordance with the
facts on the ground when you in your
political experience no doubt you've
dealt with political leaders who have a
vision and who are abiding by principles
and then you have dealt with political
leaders who don't and one of the
questions I have for you as a
consequence is
what is it that you think that the
leaders who don't have who aren't Guided
by principle and vision what is it that
they're pursuing and in your experience
is that more common on the political
front than guidance by vision and
principle
uh in general yes it's more common uh
and that's why people don't have high
respect for politicians they speak of
principle but they're usually interested
in personal power
for me power by itself uh is is
meaningless powerful what I mean I can
make a living a Better Living outside
well that's what I'm asking well that's
that's exactly what I'm asking I don't
really understand I don't understand the
drive for power so to speak or authority
or influence outside of the realm of
guiding principle because it it like if
it's just a shallow Hedonism let's say
or a desire for a claim I would think
also there's there's easier and more
productive ways of pursuing that I I
certainly agree with you you're right
because Israeli politics isn't exactly a
walk in the woods I mean uh or a Rose
Garden it's very cruel and my family and
myself was subjected to incredible uh uh
calumny and Slanders and Liza it's
horrible so unless you have an
overriding purpose uh there's no point
to come back twice from political death
to have been eulogized usually
unfavorably doesn't you don't come back
uh for the perks of power which are
absurd anyway I mean anybody who could
learn a living will will do better than
what heads of state get in the western
world uh you know they're they're forced
into Draco and it's nothing I mean
believe me you get you get better
accommodations when you're in the
private sector so that's not the reason
for me uh right as I said I've lived a
life of purpose to revamp uh to assure
Israel's permanence my father and my
grandfather worked very hard labored
very hard to assure that the Jewish
people would come back would have a
state and I worked very hard to assure
that they'd keep a state and that that
state would become a Power among the
Nations by the way the University of
Pennsylvania has this annual poll in
which they asked 17 000 opinion leaders
in I think 20 countries to rank the
powers of the world and in the decade
that I led Israel in between 2000 10 to
2020 Israel was consistently ranked
consistently ranked as the eighth power
in the world now you've got to
understand we're one tenth of one
percent of the population of the world
you know we're going to reach 10 million
soon ahead of us our country is with
billion people hundreds of millions of
people tens of millions of people and
below is the same but we stand out this
tiny tiny country and the reason that's
so is because I put this Vision that is
my purpose in life into being but it's
the the jury is still out it's not that
you can sit on your laurels I can't say
oh well and I'm coming back in I've done
it I wrote my biography or my
autobiography that's it no you have to
constantly work at it you have to
constantly increase increase the
economic power increase the Innovation
increase the circle of Peace expanded
and block those who would who trample us
and who'd uh you know it's not automatic
it's not obvious
that history will be kind to the good
it's not true history has been kind to
the bad history has been kind to the
worst people I mean the Genghis Khan
ruled ruled a good chunk of the world
for over a century and created horrible
you know terrible Horrors the Roman
Empire you could judge it this way or
that way but they ruled through the
force of arms and subjugation for
hundreds centuries okay the history you
know Martin Luther King said the Arc of
History bends towards Justice maybe so
but that Ark is very brittle and it
could be broken by the most the darkness
there's lots of variability lots of
variabilities and right now the darkest
force in our immediate vicinity is this
horrible regime in Tehran in Iran that
everybody can see it's Horrors what it's
doing to those incredibly brave men
incredibly Brave women were dying on the
streets there and that if I say that the
Ark of History will bend towards
catastrophe if these ayatollahs these
thugs these uh
theological thugs would have nuclear
weapons and the means to deliver them to
every part of the earth so I've made it
my life's Mission so far successful to
prevent them from having that but it's
an ongoing thing the jury is still out
there are many things it's it's not
guaranteed right right well part of the
reason you were able to offer something
attractive to the Arab countries with
whom you signed a peace Accord was
because you had something to offer as
you mentioned before in relationship to
Iran and so let's talk about the Abraham
Accords a bit more now you're going to
be moving back into office in the
upcoming weeks in all likelihood and you
indicated you're you're continuing
interest for obvious reasons in
expanding the Abraham Accords and you
mentioned Saudi Arabia if what can you
can you can you explain a little bit
about your vision of the most likely
pathway forward on the Abraham Accord
front are the Saudis in are the Saudis
next to sign so to speak is does that
beckoning on the horizon I can't speak
for them but and the Saudis are
tremendously important I I think it
should be understood it's not just
another country that would be added to
the roster of Peace this is uh this is
by far the most uh significant uh and
influential Arab country although there
are some uh remarkable examples of
achievement in in the United Arab
Emirates and other places in the Arab
world but the Saudis undoubtedly are
in a category of their own and yes I
would like to have peace with them
certainly begin with normalization but
you have to the answer is will they be
there first of all where are they this
is an interesting question there's no
way that we would have been able to
achieve the Peace Accords the
normalization Accords with the Emirates
and Bahrain without tacit Saudi approval
there's also no way no way that we could
fly
above the Skies of Saudi Arabia without
Saudi approval uh the there's no way
that I could speak the other day as I
did when the elections results were
known with my Saudi friend
um Muhammad Saud he's the I call it the
likud branch manager he speaks on Saudi
internet okay and he congratulates me
and he says Bibi we're for you speak
zebra by the way we're for you he
visited Israel there's no way that this
is done
without uh approval uh why did this
change take place and that could be an
indication of where we go from here
the Quantum Leap in our relations with
uh the Gulf States took place in 2015.
when President Obama uh when when the
United or rather with a joint session of
Congress invited me to speak before it
on the impending nuclear deal that
President Obama was going to sign with
Iran
even though I knew that I couldn't
reverse it I couldn't get two-thirds
majority in the in the Congress to be
resist it I thought I could get a
majority to oppose it and I did
consisting not only of Republicans but
quite a few Democrats but I knew I
couldn't get two-thirds I can't get
two-thirds in our can I see in our
Parliament I certainly could get it in
the American Congress but I went to
speak there
and I spoke
by the way Jordan I described the speech
I never prepared for a speech like this
in my life and I I prepare my speeches
right up to the podium I changed them on
the podium you know I'm so stickler for
for the precise word so uh while I came
into
just as an aside I came to Washington
and you'll read this in the second part
of the book but I came to Washington
um
to challenge a sitting president it's a
very very difficult thing to do and even
though you know Obama was the
quintessential example of uh of a leader
who had was there not for power itself
but for for a purpose he had an ideology
it's just that his ideology clashed with
mine he believed that uh you know peace
will produce power and I believe that
power produces peace and if you ask me
to do a peace treaty that will uh
basically
leave me shorn of my power it won't last
for five minutes so we had a difference
of views but it clashed it literally
clashed with with the question of the
Iran Accords which I thought merely
paved the way for Iran to become a
military nuclear power which will
threaten all of us so I not uh
light-headedly but after considerable uh
deliberation went to Washington arrived
in Washington the evening before I'm
going to go over the speech and I try
try to practice a speech and my sinuses
are clogged I have that condition
and I put more and more nose spray and
they're getting clogged they're both
clogged and I try to practice the speech
and I'm stopped in mid-sentence every
mid-sentence and I say to my wife this
is the worst thing that could happen the
most important speech of my life and I'm
stuck because of these horrible nose
drops and I fling them in the air and
they try to give me bowls of steam they
bring a medic nothing happens
she says well sleep it over it'll pass
by morning well it didn't and I didn't
sleep a wink I get up in the morning we
make our way towards the capital
building and I say what
what in God's name am I going to do I
mean I can't deliver a line of the
speech and as we see the steps of the
capital lo and behold like a Biblical
Miracle the sinus is cleared the water
is recede okay and I go in and I give I
give the speech which was very well
received very well received uh and
here's what happened and this is the
relationship to Abraham Accords
as I'm giving the speech in a joint
session of Congress my delegation
receives calls in real time
from Arab these Arab states some of them
and they say we can't believe what your
prime minister is doing he's challenging
a sitting American president the most
powerful man in the world
that led to clandestine meetings between
me and these Arab leaders and I won't
itemize the where they were in the Gulf
they were in the Red Sea they were on a
yacht I landed in a helicopter on a
yacht you can believe it my security
people said that's too dangerous I said
skip it we're doing it and this led to
the Abraham Accords that were later
culminated with the help of President
Trump and he had an important role here
and I value and appreciate that I'll
never never stop appreciating this
because I think it was very important
but it took me a while to persuade him
he got very little credit for that too
by the way
well he got all the credit for me but it
took me three years to persuade him
because he was going down the
Palestinian uh the Palestinian Rabbit
Hole uh Ron dermer my ambassador to
Washington tried to say the difference
between he said look he said getting a
peace treaty with uh I'm not a golf
player so he said getting a peace treaty
with the United Arab Emirates is a
15-foot putt getting peace treaty with
Saudi Arabia is a 30-foot putt getting a
peace treaty with the Palestinians is
150 foot putt through a brick wall so it
took me about three three years to
persuade the president what I said to
him and I also described this in my book
I say in the very first meeting I had
with Trump in the white house as
president
I said to him Donald there are four
peace treaties waiting to be plucked
ripe you know plums ready to be plucked
off the tree and I itemized the country
and I suggested that he bring an
aircraft carrier to the Red Sea and
invite me and these Arab leaders there
to discuss Iran's security I said that
will produce peace treaties right right
off the bat uh and he didn't buy it he
thought I was trying to evade the
Palestinian track and I said okay we'll
try the Palestinian track and we worked
on that and of course we produced a
template which I think I think is very
productive but the Palestinians wouldn't
come uh just as Arafat couldn't make
peace any more than he could fly to the
moon the present leadership can't do it
because they'd have to give up what is
really guiding the Palestinian national
movement which is not to build a state
but to destroy one the Jewish state so
they didn't go that didn't go anywhere
and so we tried the other track
the track of peace through strength the
the path of peaceful peace the peace for
economy peace for other things and boom
it exploded now will Saudi Arabia be
next it's up to them of course but I
think that uh this will be a worthwhile
goal for me I believe for for the entire
world and I believe for the leaders of
the Saudi Arabia it could be a
tremendous tremendous change so why do
you why do you think why do you think
the Biden Administration hasn't jumped
on the Saudi Arabia opportunity
especially given that they buy the
administration and the Americans in
general would have benefited from closer
relations with the Saudis given the
current state of energy what would you
say uncertainty that plagues the United
States and the rest of the world I mean
it just seemed to me that that again
that was low-hanging fruit that was just
ready ready to be plucked because I knew
that the Saudis for example were on
board at least tacitly behind the scenes
in relation to the Abraham Accords and
it seems
it seems obvious beyond belief that
assadi Israel peace Accord would be of
benefit obviously not only to the Saudis
and the Israelis but to everyone in the
world especially given the threat of
Iran so I don't understand
why this process has been stalled and so
what do you what are your feelings about
that well probably for two reasons
uh of course I'll have an opportunity to
speak to President Biden who's been a
longtime friend 40 years we've known
each other since we were both young men
I came to Washington as a diplomat a
young Diplomat and he came as a young
Senator so I definitely intend to take
it up with him uh I think there are two
schools of thought that push back this
obvious uh this obvious opportunity that
you uh you describe the first is the
Palestinian straitjacket that says and
it still lingers among the foreign
policy Elites I mean they've been added
for decades they can't let it go they
said well I know you have to peace means
peace with the Palestinians peace in the
Middle East it's not in the Middle East
it's peace in the tiny part of the
Middle East between Israel and the
Palestinians but peace with the entire
world that's not peace uh or you can't
get to it before you you know you get
through the 150-foot putt through the
Iron Wall which means you'll never get
to it right so that's the lingering
thing among the foreign policy and it's
maybe changing because the Abraham
Accords sort of started shaking people
up to see that there are other
opportunities broader opportunities
right for peace than uh than they ever
imagined the second reason is that
uh for Saudi Arabia I think
making that transition requires
continually habituating uh Saudi public
opinion but also uh conforming to the
broader uh Saudi interests there are two
interests that Saudi Arabia has it wants
to modernize Saudi Arabia there's no
question that the current leader
Muhammad bin Salman wants to modernize
Saudi Arabia Propel it to uh uh to be an
advanced country doesn't mean Democratic
country not in the way that we think but
look at the United Arab Emirates or look
at Singapore for that matter they're not
exactly
European style Luxembourg style
democracies okay but they have degrees
of freedom in the economy and the life
of the people that is obviously very
different from what you have in Iraq or
Syria it's a different thing altogether
okay
um so I'm sure that they want to go
there but to that he would want to go
there but for the Saudi leadership to go
there they would have to uh I think be
assured that their national interests
and especially their National Security
interest uh are protected and that
requires
a certain flexibility
on the part of those who want them to
take this move I'm talking about the
United States so it may be that uh it
may be that there's there's a lot more
to discuss on both to be more specific I
obviously have given this some thought
uh and and I'd like to
I'd like to have a go at it obviously
very soon I hope
hello everyone I would encourage you to
continue listening to my conversation
with my guest on dailywireplus.com